---
title: "Game Mechanics: Race"
author: Kevin Damm
---

# Game Mechanics: Race

Many of the earliest known games such as Nyout, Patolli, Royal Game of Goose,
Senat, Cribbage and Backgammon have a common mechanic of advancing tokens to
reach a goal before the opponents do.  Usually aided with dice for an element
of chance, players vie for scoring higher rolls and ensuring some distance
advantage during play.  It can also apply to games where skill advances the
player's position (as in an actual leg race) but does not include the element
of reaching a certain point total on any state unrelated to position.

## Related game mechanics

This mechanic combines well with environment-hazard and peer-punishment.  There
are exceptions (cribbage has no environment sensitive effects, Nyout and Senat
are without an actin of resetting an opponent's progress).  Sometimes the race
terms require that the final throw exactly match the final position in the race
(no-overthrows).

It is almost always paired with movement-pointwise because area-based movement
complicates the finish-line criteria, but there are ways to combine the race
mechanic with area-acquisition or map-reduction.  This does not include games
where the end state is dependent on either player being unable to move, this
mechanic implies that a player is able to win the game by achieving a certain
state, not by the inability of their opponent to make a move, although a game
can have both types of mechanics in its rules and terminating conditions.

## Board dependency

This mechanic usually depends on a board-linear-path or board-spiral-path even
when the layout is in a grid (e.g., with Snakes & Ladders).  Because the race
mechanic involves edging out the opponents, the terrain involved is usually
narrow or full of bottlenecks.  The cross inside of a circle from Nyout is an
excellent example of how a simple layout can still offer multiple points of
contention, when the board is not a simple path.  Chinese Checkers is an
exceptional example where race and a (hexagonal) grid can indeed be combined.

## See Also

This is not to be confused with another sense of race, that of a distinction
of origin or background.  Some games do employ different commanders' or units'
attributes for gameplay but this is represented by the variable-player-powers
mechanic in games where the difference has any consequence.  Otherwise that race
has no bearing on gameplay or other game mechanics.
